Ros. My lord, you once did love me.
Ham. And do still, by these pickers and stealers!
Ros. Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do surely
bar the door upon your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to
your friend.
Ham. Sir, i lack advancement.
Ros. How can that be, when you have the voice of the king himself
for your succession in denmark?
Ham. Ay, sir, but 'while the grass grows'- the proverb is something
musty.
Enter the players with recorders.
O, the recorders! Let me see one. To withdraw with you- why do
you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me
into a toil?
Guil. O my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.
Ham. I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this pipe?
Guil. My lord, i cannot.
Ham. I pray you.
Guil. Believe me, i cannot.
Ham. I do beseech you.
Guil. I know, no touch of it, my lord.
Ham. It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages with your
fingers and thumbs, give it breath with your mouth, and it will
discourse most eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.
Guil. But these cannot i command to any utt'rance of harmony. I
have not the skill.
Ham. Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! You
would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you would
pluck out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from my
lowest note to the top of my compass; and there is much music,
excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you make it
speak. 'sblood, do you think i am easier to be play'd on than a
pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me,
you cannot play upon me.
Enter polonius.
God bless you, sir!
Pol. My lord, the queen would speak with you, and presently.
Ham. Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?
Pol. By th' mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.
Ham. Methinks it is like a weasel.
Pol. It is back'd like a weasel.
Ham. Or like a whale.
Pol. Very like a whale.
Ham. Then will i come to my mother by-and-by. - they fool me to the
top of my bent. - i will come by-and-by.
Pol. I will say so. Exit.
Ham. 'by-and-by' is easily said. - leave me, friends.
[exeunt all but hamlet. ]
'tis now the very witching time of night,
when churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out
contagion to this world. Now could i drink hot blood
and do such bitter business as the day
would quake to look on. Soft! Now to my mother!
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
the soul of nero enter this firm bosom.
Let me be cruel, not unnatural;
i will speak daggers to her, but use none.
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites-
how in my words somever she be shent,
to give them seals never, my soul, consent! Exit.
Scene iii.
A room in the castle.
Enter king, rosencrantz, and guildenstern.
King. I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
to let his madness range. Therefore prepare you;
i your commission will forthwith dispatch,
and he to england shall along with you.
The terms of our estate may not endure
hazard so near us as doth hourly grow
out of his lunacies.
Guil. We will ourselves provide.
Most holy and religious fear it is
to keep those many many bodies safe
that live and feed upon your majesty.
Ros. The single and peculiar life is bound
with all the strength and armour of the mind
to keep itself from noyance; but much more
that spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
the lives of many. The cesse of majesty
dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
what's near it with it. It is a massy wheel,
fix'd on the summit of the highest mount,
to whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
are mortis'd and adjoin'd; which when it falls,
each small annexment, petty consequence,
attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
King. Arm you, i pray you, to th', speedy voyage;
for we will fetters put upon this fear,
which now goes too free-footed.
Both. We will haste us.
Exeunt gentlemen.
Enter polonius.
Pol. My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
Behind the arras i'll convey myself
to hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him home;
and, as you said, and wisely was it said,
'tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
the speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
and tell you what i know.
King. Thanks, dear my lord.
Exit [polonius].
O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;
it hath the primal eldest curse upon't,
a brother's murther! Pray can i not,
though inclination be as sharp as will.
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
and, like a man to double business bound,
i stand in pause where i shall first begin,
and both neglect. What if this cursed hand
were thicker than itself with brother's blood,
is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
to wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
but to confront the visage of offence?
And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
to be forestalled ere we come to fall,
or pardon'd being down? Then i'll look up;
my fault is past. But, o, what form of prayer
can serve my turn? 'forgive me my foul murther'?
That cannot be; since i am still possess'd
of those effects for which i did the murther-
my crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
May one be pardon'd and retain th' offence?
In the corrupted currents of this world
offence's gilded hand may shove by justice,
and oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
buys out the law; but 'tis not so above.
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
in his true nature, and we ourselves compell'd,
even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
to give in evidence. What then? What rests?
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Yet what can it when one cannot repent?
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
art more engag'd! Help, angels! Make assay.
Bow, stubborn knees; and heart with strings of steel,
be soft as sinews of the new-born babe!
All may be well. He kneels.
Enter hamlet.
Ham. Now might i do it pat, now he is praying;
and now i'll do't. And so he goes to heaven,
and so am i reveng'd. That would be scann'd.
A villain kills my father; and for that,
i, his sole son, do this same villain send
to heaven.
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge!
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
with all his crimes broad blown, as flush as may;
and how his audit stands, who knows save heaven?
But in our circumstance and course of thought,
'tis heavy with him; and am i then reveng'd,
to take him in the purging of his soul,
when he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
No.
Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
When he is drunk asleep; or in his rage;
or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed;
at gaming, swearing, or about some act
that has no relish of salvation in't-
then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
and that his soul may be as damn'd and black
as hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days. Exit.
King. [rises] my words fly up, my thoughts remain below.
Words without thoughts never to heaven go. Exit.
Scene iv.
The queen's closet.
Enter queen and polonius.
Pol. He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,
and that your grace hath screen'd and stood between
much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
Pray you be round with him.
Ham. (within) mother, mother, mother!
Queen. I'll warrant you; fear me not. Withdraw; i hear him coming.
[polonius hides behind the arras. ]
enter hamlet.
Ham. Now, mother, what's the matter?
Queen. Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Ham. Mother, you have my father much offended.
Queen. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
Ham. Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
Queen. Why, how now, hamlet?
Ham. What's the matter now?
Queen. Have you forgot me?
Ham. No, by the rood, not so!
You are the queen, your husband's brother's wife,
and (would it were not so! ) you are my mother.
Queen. Nay, then i'll set those to you that can speak.
Ham. Come, come, and sit you down. You shall not budge i
you go not till i set you up a glass
where you may see the inmost part of you.
Queen. What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murther me?
Help, help, ho!
Pol. [behind] what, ho! Help, help, help!
Ham. [draws] how now? A rat? Dead for a ducat, dead!
[makes a pass through the arras and] kills polonius.
Pol. [behind] o, i am slain!
Queen. O me, what hast thou done?
Ham. Nay, i know not. Is it the king?
Queen. O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
Ham. A bloody deed- almost as bad, good mother,
as kill a king, and marry with his brother.
Queen. As kill a king?
Ham. Ay, lady, it was my word.
[lifts up the arras and sees polonius. ]
thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
Leave wringing of your hinds. Peace! Sit you down
and let me wring your heart; for so i shall
if it be made of penetrable stuff;
if damned custom have not braz'd it so
that it is proof and bulwark against sense.
Queen. What have i done that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
in noise so rude against me?
Ham. Such an act
that blurs the grace and blush of modesty;
calls virtue hypocrite; takes off the rose
from the fair forehead of an innocent love,
and sets a blister there; makes marriage vows
as false as dicers' oaths. O, such a deed
as from the body of contraction plucks
the very soul, and sweet religion makes
a rhapsody of words! Heaven's face doth glow;
yea, this solidity and compound mass,
with tristful visage, as against the doom,
is thought-sick at the act.
Queen. Ay me, what act,
that roars so loud and thunders in the index?
Ham. Look here upon th's picture, and on this,
the counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
See what a grace was seated on this brow;
hyperion's curls; the front of jove himself;
an eye like mars, to threaten and command;
a station like the herald mercury
new lighted on a heaven-kissing hill:
a combination and a form indeed
where every god did seem to set his seal
to give the world assurance of a man.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
Here is your husband, like a mildew'd ear
blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,
and batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes
you cannot call it love; for at your age
the heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,
and waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
is apoplex'd; for madness would not err,
nor sense to ecstacy was ne'er so thrall'd
but it reserv'd some quantity of choice
to serve in such a difference. What devil was't
that thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman-blind?
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
or but a sickly part of one true sense
could not so mope.
O shame! Where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,
if thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
to flaming youth let virtue be as wax
and melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
when the compulsive ardour gives the charge,
since frost itself as actively doth burn,
and reason panders will.
Queen. O hamlet, speak no more!
Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul,
and there i see such black and grained spots
as will not leave their tinct.
Ham. Nay, but to live
in the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
stew'd in corruption, honeying and making love
over the nasty sty!
Queen. O, speak to me no more!
These words like daggers enter in mine ears.
No more, sweet hamlet!
Ham. A murtherer and a villain!
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
of your precedent lord; a vice of kings;
a cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
that from a shelf the precious diadem stole
and put it in his pocket!
Queen. No more!
Enter the ghost in his nightgown.
Ham. A king of shreds and patches! -
save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
you heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?
Queen. Alas, he's mad!
Ham. Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
that, laps'd in time and passion, lets go by
th' important acting of your dread command?
O, say!
Ghost. Do not forget. This visitation
is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
O, step between her and her fighting soul
conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
Speak to her, hamlet.
Ham. How is it with you, lady?
Queen. Alas, how is't with you,
that you do bend your eye on vacancy,
and with th' encorporal air do hold discourse?
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep;
and, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,
start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
upon the beat and flame of thy distemper
sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
Ham. On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares!
His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,
would make them capable. - do not look upon me,
lest with this piteous action you convert
my stern effects. Then what i have to do
will want true colour- tears perchance for blood.
Queen. To whom do you speak this?
Ham. Do you see nothing there?
Queen. Nothing at all; yet all that is i see.
Ham. Nor did you nothing hear?
Queen. No, nothing but ourselves.
Ham. Why, look you there! Look how it steals away!
My father, in his habit as he liv'd!
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
Exit ghost.
Queen. This is the very coinage of your brain.
This bodiless creation ecstasy
is very cunning in.
Ham. Ecstasy?
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
and makes as healthful music. It is not madness
that i have utt'red. Bring me to the test,
and i the matter will reword; which madness
would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
lay not that flattering unction to your soul
that not your trespass but my madness speaks.
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven;
repent what's past; avoid what is to come;
and do not spread the compost on the weeds
to make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue;
for in the fatness of these pursy times
virtue itself of vice must pardon beg-
yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
Queen. O hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.
Ham. O, throw away the worser part of it,
and live the purer with the other half,
good night- but go not to my uncle's bed.
Assume a virtue, if you have it not.
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat
of habits evil, is angel yet in this,
that to the use of actions fair and good
he likewise gives a frock or livery,
that aptly is put on. Refrain to-night,
and that shall lend a kind of easiness
to the next abstinence; the next more easy;
for use almost can change the stamp of nature,
and either [master] the devil, or throw him out
with wondrous potency. Once more, good night;
and when you are desirous to be blest,
i'll blessing beg of you. - for this same lord,
i do repent; but heaven hath pleas'd it so,
