
a brother's murther! Pray can i not,
a combination and a form indeed
a cutpurse of the empire and the rule,
All may be well. He kneels.
and, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm,
and, as you said, and wisely was it said,
and, like a man to double business bound,
and (would it were not so! ) you are my mother.
and batten on this moor? Ha! Have you eyes
and both neglect. What if this cursed hand
and do not spread the compost on the weeds
and do such bitter business as the day
and either [master] the devil, or throw him out
and he to england shall along with you.
and how his audit stands, who knows save heaven?
and i the matter will reword; which madness
and let me wring your heart; for so i shall
and live the purer with the other half,
and makes as healthful music. It is not madness
and melt in her own fire. Proclaim no shame
and now i'll do't. And so he goes to heaven,
and oft 'tis seen the wicked prize itself
and put it in his pocket!
and reason panders will.
and sets a blister there; makes marriage vows
and so am i reveng'd. That would be scann'd.
and tell you what i know.
and that his soul may be as damn'd and black
and that shall lend a kind of easiness
and that your grace hath screen'd and stood between
and there i see such black and grained spots
and waits upon the judgment; and what judgment
And what's in prayer but this twofold force,
and when you are desirous to be blest,
and with th' encorporal air do hold discourse?
an eye like mars, to threaten and command;
are mortis'd and adjoin'd; which when it falls,
a rhapsody of words! Heaven's face doth glow;
A room in the castle.
art more engag'd! Help, angels! Make assay.
as false as dicers' oaths. O, such a deed
as from the body of contraction plucks
as hell, whereto it goes. My mother stays.
as kill a king, and marry with his brother.
A slave that is not twentieth part the tithe
Assume a virtue, if you have it not.
a station like the herald mercury
as will not leave their tinct.
at gaming, swearing, or about some act
attends the boist'rous ruin. Never alone
A villain kills my father; and for that,
bar the door upon your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to
Behind the arras i'll convey myself
be soft as sinews of the new-born babe!
blasting his wholesome brother. Have you eyes?
Both. We will haste us.
Bow, stubborn knees; and heart with strings of steel,
But in our circumstance and course of thought,
but it reserv'd some quantity of choice
But look, amazement on thy mother sits.
but to confront the visage of offence?
buys out the law; but 'tis not so above.
calls virtue hypocrite; takes off the rose
can serve my turn? 'forgive me my foul murther'?
conceit in weakest bodies strongest works.
contagion to this world. Now could i drink hot blood
could not so mope.
Could you on this fair mountain leave to feed,
did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
dies not alone, but like a gulf doth draw
discourse most eloquent music. Look you, these are the stops.
each small annexment, petty consequence,
ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all,
else could you not have motion; but sure that sense
Enter hamlet.
enter hamlet.
Enter king, rosencrantz, and guildenstern.
Enter polonius.
Enter polonius.
Enter queen and polonius.
Enter the ghost in his nightgown.
Enter the players with recorders.
even to the teeth and forehead of our faults,
excellent voice, in this little organ, yet cannot you make it
Exeunt gentlemen.
Exit ghost.
Exit [polonius].
Eyes without feeling, feeling without sight,
fingers and thumbs, give it breath with your mouth, and it will
fix'd on the summit of the highest mount,
for in the fatness of these pursy times
Forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep;
for use almost can change the stamp of nature,
for we will fetters put upon this fear,
for your succession in denmark?
from the fair forehead of an innocent love,
Ghost. Do not forget. This visitation
God bless you, sir!
good night- but go not to my uncle's bed.
Guil. Believe me, i cannot.
Guil. But these cannot i command to any utt'rance of harmony. I
Guil. I know, no touch of it, my lord.
Guil. My lord, i cannot.
Guil. O my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.
Guil. We will ourselves provide.
Ham. A bloody deed- almost as bad, good mother,
Ham. A king of shreds and patches! -
Ham. A murtherer and a villain!
Ham. And do still, by these pickers and stealers!
Ham. Ay, lady, it was my word.
Ham. Ay, sir, but 'while the grass grows'- the proverb is something
Ham. 'by-and-by' is easily said. - leave me, friends.
Ham. Come, come, and sit you down. You shall not budge i
Ham. Do you not come your tardy son to chide,
Ham. Do you see nothing there?
Ham. Do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?
Ham. Ecstasy?
Ham. Go, go, you question with a wicked tongue.
Ham. How is it with you, lady?
Ham. I do beseech you.
Ham. I do not well understand that. Will you play upon this pipe?
Ham. I pray you.
Ham. It is as easy as lying. Govern these ventages with your
Ham. Look here upon th's picture, and on this,
Ham. Methinks it is like a weasel.
Ham. Mother, you have my father much offended.
Ham. Nay, but to live
Ham. Nay, i know not. Is it the king?
Ham. No, by the rood, not so!
Ham. Nor did you nothing hear?
Ham. Now, mother, what's the matter?
Ham. Now might i do it pat, now he is praying;
Ham. O, throw away the worser part of it,
Ham. On him, on him! Look you how pale he glares!
Ham. Or like a whale.
Ham. Sir, i lack advancement.
Ham. Such an act
Ham. Then will i come to my mother by-and-by. - they fool me to the
Ham. What's the matter now?
Ham. Why, look you now, how unworthy a thing you make of me! You
Ham. Why, look you there! Look how it steals away!
Ham. (within) mother, mother, mother!
Ham. [draws] how now? A rat? Dead for a ducat, dead!
have not the skill.
hazard so near us as doth hourly grow
he likewise gives a frock or livery,
Help, help, ho!
Here is your husband, like a mildew'd ear
He took my father grossly, full of bread,
His form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones,
how in my words somever she be shent,
hyperion's curls; the front of jove himself;
i, his sole son, do this same villain send
i do repent; but heaven hath pleas'd it so,
if damned custom have not braz'd it so
if it be made of penetrable stuff;
if thou canst mutine in a matron's bones,
i'll blessing beg of you. - for this same lord,
I'll call upon you ere you go to bed
infects unseen. Confess yourself to heaven;
in his true nature, and we ourselves compell'd,
in noise so rude against me?
In the corrupted currents of this world
in the rank sweat of an enseamed bed,
into a toil?
is apoplex'd; for madness would not err,
is but to whet thy almost blunted purpose.
i stand in pause where i shall first begin,
is there not rain enough in the sweet heavens
is thought-sick at the act.
is very cunning in.
it hath the primal eldest curse upon't,
I took thee for thy better. Take thy fortune.
It will but skin and film the ulcerous place,
i will speak daggers to her, but use none.
i your commission will forthwith dispatch,
King. Arm you, i pray you, to th', speedy voyage;
King. I like him not, nor stands it safe with us
King. Thanks, dear my lord.
King. [rises] my words fly up, my thoughts remain below.
lay not that flattering unction to your soul
Leave wringing of your hinds. Peace! Sit you down
lest with this piteous action you convert
Let me be cruel, not unnatural;
Look where he goes even now out at the portal!
lowest note to the top of my compass; and there is much music,
May one be pardon'd and retain th' offence?
Most holy and religious fear it is
much heat and him. I'll silence me even here.
musty.
my crown, mine own ambition, and my queen.
My father, in his habit as he liv'd!
my fault is past. But, o, what form of prayer
My pulse as yours doth temperately keep time
my stern effects. Then what i have to do
My stronger guilt defeats my strong intent,
My tongue and soul in this be hypocrites-
new lighted on a heaven-kissing hill:
No.
No more, sweet hamlet!
nor sense to ecstacy was ne'er so thrall'd
O, my offence is rank, it smells to heaven;
O, say!
O, step between her and her fighting soul
O, the recorders! Let me see one. To withdraw with you- why do
offence's gilded hand may shove by justice,
of habits evil, is angel yet in this,
of those effects for which i did the murther-
of your precedent lord; a vice of kings;
O heart, lose not thy nature; let not ever
O limed soul, that, struggling to be free,
or but a sickly part of one true sense
or in th' incestuous pleasure of his bed;
or pardon'd being down? Then i'll look up;
O shame! Where is thy blush? Rebellious hell,
out of his lunacies.
over the nasty sty!
O wretched state! O bosom black as death!
pipe? Call me what instrument you will, though you can fret me,
pluck out the heart of my mystery; you would sound me from my
Pol. By th' mass, and 'tis like a camel indeed.
Pol. He will come straight. Look you lay home to him.
Pol. It is back'd like a weasel.
Pol. I will say so. Exit.
Pol. My lord, he's going to his mother's closet.
Pol. My lord, the queen would speak with you, and presently.
Pol. Very like a whale.
Pol. [behind] o, i am slain!
Pol. [behind] what, ho! Help, help, help!
Pray you be round with him.
Queen. Alas, he's mad!
Queen. Alas, how is't with you,
Queen. As kill a king?
Queen. Ay me, what act,
Queen. Come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
Queen. Hamlet, thou hast thy father much offended.
Queen. Have you forgot me?
Queen. I'll warrant you; fear me not. Withdraw; i hear him coming.
Queen. Nay, then i'll set those to you that can speak.
Queen. No, nothing but ourselves.
Queen. No more!
Queen. Nothing at all; yet all that is i see.
Queen. O, speak to me no more!
Queen. O, what a rash and bloody deed is this!
Queen. O hamlet, speak no more!
Queen. O hamlet, thou hast cleft my heart in twain.
Queen. O me, what hast thou done?
Queen. This is the very coinage of your brain.
Queen. To whom do you speak this?
Queen. What have i done that thou dar'st wag thy tongue
Queen. What wilt thou do? Thou wilt not murther me?
Queen. Why, how now, hamlet?
repent what's past; avoid what is to come;
Ros. Good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? You do surely
Ros. How can that be, when you have the voice of the king himself
Ros. My lord, you once did love me.
Ros. The single and peculiar life is bound
save me and hover o'er me with your wings,
Scene iii.
Scene iv.
See what a grace was seated on this brow;
since frost itself as actively doth burn,
since nature makes them partial, should o'erhear
speak. 'sblood, do you think i am easier to be play'd on than a
Speak to her, hamlet.
sprinkle cool patience! Whereon do you look?
start up and stand an end. O gentle son,
stew'd in corruption, honeying and making love
Tell him his pranks have been too broad to bear with,
th' important acting of your dread command?
that, laps'd in time and passion, lets go by
that aptly is put on. Refrain to-night,
that blurs the grace and blush of modesty;
That cannot be; since i am still possess'd
that from a shelf the precious diadem stole
that has no relish of salvation in't-
that i have utt'red. Bring me to the test,
that it is proof and bulwark against sense.
that live and feed upon your majesty.
That monster, custom, who all sense doth eat
that not your trespass but my madness speaks.
that roars so loud and thunders in the index?
that spirit upon whose weal depends and rests
that thus hath cozen'd you at hoodman-blind?
that to the use of actions fair and good
that you do bend your eye on vacancy,
the counterfeit presentment of two brothers.
the heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble,
the lives of many. The cesse of majesty
then trip him, that his heels may kick at heaven,
The queen's closet.
There is no shuffling; there the action lies
These words like daggers enter in mine ears.
the soul of nero enter this firm bosom.
the speech, of vantage. Fare you well, my liege.
The terms of our estate may not endure
the very soul, and sweet religion makes
This bodiless creation ecstasy
This physic but prolongs thy sickly days. Exit.
This was your husband. Look you now what follows.
Thou find'st to be too busy is some danger.
though inclination be as sharp as will.
Thou turn'st mine eyes into my very soul,
thou wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell!
'tis heavy with him; and am i then reveng'd,
'tis meet that some more audience than a mother,
'tis now the very witching time of night,
to be forestalled ere we come to fall,
to flaming youth let virtue be as wax
to give in evidence. What then? What rests?
to give them seals never, my soul, consent! Exit.
to give the world assurance of a man.
to hear the process. I'll warrant she'll tax him home;
to heaven.
to keep itself from noyance; but much more
to keep those many many bodies safe
to let his madness range. Therefore prepare you;
to make them ranker. Forgive me this my virtue;
top of my bent. - i will come by-and-by.
to serve in such a difference. What devil was't
to take him in the purging of his soul,
to the next abstinence; the next more easy;
to wash it white as snow? Whereto serves mercy
to whose huge spokes ten thousand lesser things
Try what repentance can. What can it not?
Up, sword, and know thou a more horrid hent.
upon the beat and flame of thy distemper
virtue itself of vice must pardon beg-
were thicker than itself with brother's blood,
what's near it with it. It is a massy wheel,
when churchyards yawn, and hell itself breathes out
When he is drunk asleep; or in his rage;
when he is fit and seasoned for his passage?
when the compulsive ardour gives the charge,
where every god did seem to set his seal
where you may see the inmost part of you.
which now goes too free-footed.
whiles rank corruption, mining all within,
Why, this is hire and salary, not revenge!
will want true colour- tears perchance for blood.
with all his crimes broad blown, as flush as may;
with all the strength and armour of the mind
with tristful visage, as against the doom,
with wondrous potency. Once more, good night;
Words without thoughts never to heaven go. Exit.
would gambol from. Mother, for love of grace,
would make them capable. - do not look upon me,
would play upon me; you would seem to know my stops; you would
would quake to look on. Soft! Now to my mother!
would step from this to this? Sense sure you have,
yea, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
yea, this solidity and compound mass,
Yet what can it when one cannot repent?
You are the queen, your husband's brother's wife,
you cannot call it love; for at your age
you cannot play upon me.
you go about to recover the wind of me, as if you would drive me
you go not till i set you up a glass
you heavenly guards! What would your gracious figure?
your bedded hairs, like life in excrements,
your friend.
[exeunt all but hamlet. ]
[lifts up the arras and sees polonius. ]
[makes a pass through the arras and] kills polonius.
[polonius hides behind the arras. ]
